---

release: rc1
apache: true
title: 1.6.0
date: 2026-01-28
summary: >
   Update to Daffodil 4.1.0, support for cross building

source-dist:
    - "apache-daffodil-sbt-1.6.0-src.zip"
---

This is a minor release of the Apache Daffodil SBT Plugin.

See the [GitHub page](https://github.com/apache/daffodil-sbt) for details to enable and configure.

# New Features

* Add support for Daffodil 4.1.0
* The default value of the `daffodilVersion` setting is changed to `4.1.0`
* Add support for creating cross daffodil version projects
* Add new `daffodilPlugin` and `daffodilBin` ModuleID enrichments, used for
  specifying dependencies to a Daffodil plugin or a saved parser
* Simplify setting scalaVersion, it now always uses the latest available Scala
  version compatible with the Daffodil version

# Bug Fixes

* Ensure plugins are built with the same JVM compatibility required by the
  Daffodil version

# Deprecation/Compatibility

* We now recommend the use of the more modern SBT project definition
  syntax and the `.daffodilProject()` function. This adds a number of
  enhancements that follow best practices, and includes improved support
  for building/testing/etc. with multiple Daffodil versions. When using
  this function, existing settings can be used except for
  `daffodilProjectVersionInfos`, which is ignored if specified.

* Plugins artifacts no longer contain the Scala cross version. They are now
  built with a classifier specific to the version of daffodil they are built
  with (e.g. `-daffodilXYZ`) similar to saved parsers.
    
# Closed Issues

[GitHub v1.6.0 Closed Issues](https://github.com/apache/daffodil-sbt/milestone/7?closed=1)
