---
title: "3.11.0"
release: final
apache: true
date: 2025-06-17
summary: >
  Change to Scala 2.13 and other bug fixes

source-dist:
 - "apache-daffodil-3.11.0-src.zip"

binary-dist:
 - "apache-daffodil-3.11.0-bin.tgz"
 - "apache-daffodil-3.11.0-bin.zip"
 - "apache-daffodil-3.11.0-bin.msi"
 - "apache-daffodil-3.11.0-1.noarch.rpm"

scala-version: 2.13
---

This release focused on tranisitioning the codebase to Scala 2.13. In addition
to this rather significant change, there were several relatively small bug
fixes and process improvements that are included with this release.


### Transition the entire codebase to Scala 2.13

  This change took a lot of time and touched nearly half of all our Scala
  files. In addition to making the eventual transition to Scala 3 easier, Scala
  2.13 has shown some small but consistent performance improvements compared to
  Daffodil 3.10.0 running Scala 2.12.

  - For those using the Daffodil API from Scala, you will need to upgrade your
    application to Scala 2.13.
  - For those using the Daffodil API from Java, the transition should be
    seamless

  See [Daffodil 3.11.0 and Scala 2.13 Transition](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/DAFFODIL/Daffodil+3.11.0+and+Scala+2.13+Transition) for more details.

* {% jira 2152 %} Add support for Scala 2.13
* {% jira 2987 %} Drop Scala 2.12

### Miscellaneous Bugs/Improvements

* {% jira 2991 %} Debugger short names are broken
* {% jira 2989 %} Plugins failing to initialize does not provide enough information in some cases
* {% jira 2984 %} Diagnostic API does not allow for getting just the message
* {% jira 2980 %} MSI files are not reproducible
* {% jira 2976 %} Update daffodil-schema.g8 giter to use most recent best practices
* {% jira 2973 %} Daffodil is unable to open its own XSD files inside a linux native image produced with Quarkus
* {% jira 2969 %} Update license copyright to 2025
* {% jira 2943 %} "LengthKind=""prefix"" textPadKind=""padChar"" incorrectly padding around prefixed length"
* {% jira 2942 %} Missing return after PE for Out of Range Binary Integers
* {% jira 2716 %} giter8 schema project generator should create types file.
* {% jira 2658 %} lengthKind 'prefixed' with textTrimKind 'padChar' padding not removed from value.

### Deprecation/Compatibility

* {% jira 2984 %} Diagnostic API does not allow for getting just the message

  A new Diagnostic.getMessageOnly() function is added to get just the
  message portion of a diagnostic, excluding mode, schema location, and
  data location portions. A future release of Daffodil may change
  Diagnostic.getMessage() to match this behavior, and getMessageOnly() may
  be removed. To ensure the current behavior is maintained with future
  releases, API users should call Diagnostic.toString() instead, which
  will always include the mode, message, schema location, and data
  location.

* {% jira 2980 %} MSI files are not reproducible

  The windows installer has switched from an MSI to an EXE. Installing the
  new version will not uninstall the previous version. Previously
  installed Daffodil MSIs should be uninstalled prior to installing new
  EXEs.

* {% jira 2152 %} Add support for Scala 2.13

  Note that some changes in 2.13 may affect the order of prefixes with the same
  namespace and may also cause them to appear uniformly but interchangeably.
  Ex: `xmlns="urn:bin" xmlns:b="urn:bin" <element/>` may become
  `xmlns:b="urn:bin" xmlns="urn:bin" <b:element/>` and vice versa.

### Dependency Changes

The following dependencies have been added or updated:

**Core**

* ICU4J 77.1 <small>(update)</small>
* Apache Commons IO 2.18.0 <small>(update)</small>
* FasterXML Woodstox Core 7.1.0 <small>(update)</small>
* Saxon-HE 12.7 <small>(update)</small>
* slf4j-api 2.0.17 <small>(update)</small>

**CLI**

* JLine 3.30.0 <small>(update)</small>

**Code Generation**

* OS Lib 0.11.4 <small>(update)</small>
