---

title: 3.6.0
release: rc1
apache: true
date: 2023-10-23
summary: >
    Miscellanous bug fixes

source-dist:
    - "apache-daffodil-3.6.0-src.zip"

binary-dist:
    - "apache-daffodil-3.6.0-bin.tgz"
    - "apache-daffodil-3.6.0-bin.zip"
    - "apache-daffodil-3.6.0-bin.msi"
    - "apache-daffodil-3.6.0-1.noarch.rpm"

scala-version: 2.12
---

This release focused primarily on bug fixes. A number of changes resulted in
deprecation or backwards incompatible changes. See the
[Deprecation/Compatibility](#deprecationcompatibility) section for more
details.

#### Miscellaneous Bug Fixes

* {% jira 541 %} TDML Runner needs to restrict text used for error comparison
* {% jira 1200 %} Really long path names in diagnostic messages make them hard to read
* {% jira 1264 %} Interactive debugger support for unparsing
* {% jira 2072 %} Poor reporting of schema errors when used as library
* {% jira 2211 %} Poor handling when dfdlx:repType is a built-in xsd type
* {% jira 2402 %} TDML language should support xsi:type annotation of infoset for double and float, perhaps more.
* {% jira 2599 %} Integration tests fail with non en\_US LANG
* {% jira 2612 %} Integration tests fail with non UTF-8 LANG
* {% jira 2694 %} CLI -t trace option doesn't work for daffodil test commands in TDML
* {% jira 2707 %} Integration tests fail when DAFFODIL\_HOME path includes spaces
* {% jira 2727 %} KEYS file contains deprecated digest algorithm, RPM key import failures
* {% jira 2728 %} Missing layer plugin causes abort "this is a bug"
* {% jira 2732 %} trace output has namespace prefix binding clutter
* {% jira 2738 %} Support indirect setting of dfdlx:repType/repValues
* {% jira 2757 %} Java 19 incompatibility floating point - 3 tests fail
* {% jira 2809 %} dfdlx:repType on an immediate simpleType is ignored
* {% jira 2828 %} Allow relative paths across schemas as schemaLocation for include/import
* {% jira 2829 %} Prepare for 3.6.0 development
* {% jira 2833 %} CLI Trace not visible to expectit functions
* {% jira 2834 %} Fix NumberformatException message in hexCharToValue
* {% jira 2837 %} Full/Custom validation removes the ability to change blob attributes
* {% jira 2839 %} Cast from xs:double/xs:float to xs:unsignedLong fails with ClassCastException error
* {% jira 2852 %} VariableMap copies during suspensions cause performance degradation
* {% jira 2853 %} Add schema validation code to C generator
* {% jira 2854 %} Release Daffodil 3.6.0

#### Deprecation/Compatibility

* `dfdlx:repType` can no longer reference primitive types (e.g. `xs:int`).
  Instead, a global simple type definition should be created which has a base
  of the primitive type.

  {% jira 2211 %}

* The `dfdlx:repType` property now must reference a type with an underlying
  primitive type derived from `xs:integer`, and elements that define
  `dfdlx:repType` must have an underlying primitive type of `xs:string`

  {% jira 2738 %} {% jira 2809 %}

* `dfdlx:repType`, `dfdlx:repValues`, and `dfdlx:repValueRanges` are now ignored if
  referenced on `xs:simpleType`s that are referenced from `xs:unions`. Instead,
  unions should be combined into a single simple type with the combined
  representation type and values properties.

  {% jira 2211 %}

* The `dfdlx:inputTypeCalc` and `dfdlx:outputTypeCalc` properties and functions
  have been removed. Instead, one should use `dfdlx:repType` with `dfdlx:repValues`
  and `dfdlx:repValueRanges`.
  
  {% jira 2211 %}

* Resolving relative import/include `schemaLocation` paths absolutely is now
  deprecated and will output a warning, and support may eventually be removed.
  For example, a common import is:

  ```xml 
  <import schemaLocation="org/apache/daffodil/xsd/DFDLGeneralFormat.dfdl.xsd" />
  ```
  
  Although this path is relative, previous versions of Daffodil allowed this to
  be found on the classpath absolutely, as if it started with a slash. This
  behavior is deprecated. If a `schemaLocation` is expected to be found on the
  classpath and not relative to the importing file, then it should start with a
  slash, for example:
 
  ```xml 
  <import schemaLocation="/org/apache/daffodil/xsd/DFDLGeneralFormat.dfdl.xsd" />
  ```
  
  Daffodil still supports the old behavior and will look up relative
  `schemaLocation` paths absolutely, but will output a schema definition warning.
  Future versions of Daffodil may change this to an error.

  {% jira 2828 %}
  
* Support for importing `edu/illinois/ncsa/daffodil/xsd/built-in-formats.xsd`
  has been removed. Schemas should instead import
  `/org/apache/daffodil/xsd/DFDLGeneralFormat.dfdl.xsd` and change `dfdl:format`
  to reference `GeneralFormat`
  
  {% jira 2828 %}
  
* `Assert.usage()` now throws a `UsageException` instead of an Abort on usage errors.
  `Compiler.forLanguage()`, `DataProcessor.parse()`, `DataProcessor.unparse()` and
  `ProcessorFactor.onPath()`, when `isError` is true, throws a `UsageError`, which
  wraps an `IllegalStateException`, unlike before where it threw an Abort.
  
  {% jira 2072 %}

#### Dependency Changes

The following dependencies have been added or updated:

**Core**

* Apache Commons IO 2.14.0 <small>(update)</small>
* FasterXML Jackson Core 2.15.3 <small>(update)</small>
* Scala XML 2.2.0 <small>(update)</small>

**CLI**

* Exificient 1.0.7 <small>(update)</small>
* Jansi 2.4.1 <small>(update)</small>
* Scallop 5.0.0 <small>(update)</small>

**Schematron Validator**

* Saxon-HE 12.3 <small>(update)</small>

**Logging**

* SLF4J API 2.0.9 <small>(update)</small>

**Changes to Transitive Dependencies**

* JAXB API 2.2.11 <small>(removed, no longer required by Exificient)</small>
* JAXB Core Implementation 2.2.11 <small>(removed, no longer required by Exificient)</small>
* JAXB Runtime 2.2.11  <small>(removed, no longer required by Exificient)</small>
* XML Resolver & Data 5.2.0 <small>(update, used by Saxon-HE)</small>
