---
title: "3.8.0"
release: "final"
apache: true
date: 2024-06-14
summary: >
  Supported Layer API for Algorithmic Plug-ins

source-dist:
 - "apache-daffodil-3.8.0-src.zip"

binary-dist:
 - "apache-daffodil-3.8.0-bin.tgz"
 - "apache-daffodil-3.8.0-bin.zip"
 - "apache-daffodil-3.8.0-bin.msi"
 - "apache-daffodil-3.8.0-1.noarch.rpm"

scala-version: 2.12
---

This release focused on providing a supported API for creating Daffodil Layers.

### Layers Feature

A layer is an algorithmic transformation of the data stream that cannot be expressed using regular
DFDL properties. 
Daffodil provides a DFDL language extension using the property name `dfdlx:layer` to invoke
these layer transformations when parsing or unparsing. 
Layers can encode/decode data as well as can verify/recompute checksums/CRCs.

See the [Layers](/layers) documentation which has links to the javadoc for the new API as well
as a description and examples of the [built-in layers](/layers#built-in-layers) that are available 
to use.

This supported API is incompatible with the experimental and unsupported prior version layering APIs.
See the [Deprecation/Compatibility](#deprecationcompatibility) section for more
details.

### New Features

* {% jira 2569 %} document how to write layer transforms
* {% jira 2903 %} Allow inputValueCalc to apear in a hidden group
* {% jira 2825 %} Define supported layering API
* {% jira 2844 %} LayerNotEnoughDataException doesn't propagate Throwable Error
* {% jira 2845 %} Layer improvements
* {% jira 2841 %} Layers do not support (or poorly documented) creating SDE or Parse/UnparseErrors

### Miscellaneous Bugs

* {% jira 2900 %} enable javadoc and scaladoc for runtime1 api
* {% jira 2905 %} add error parameter to N-byte-swap layer
* {% jira 2907 %} Improve documentation for building/testing the release candidate container
* {% jira 2104 %} TDML runner - throws exception if test has neither `<tdml:errors>` nor `<tdml:infoset>`
* {% jira 2843 %} Unclear how to create Parse/UnparseError from ParseOrUnparseState
* {% jira 2883 %} Pre-existing PUA characters in data cause SDE
* {% jira 2887 %} Choice branch array with discriminator or direct dispatch broken
* {% jira 2890 %} Set SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH when creating releases
* {% jira 2891 %} Abort: Invariant broken: minReps.==(0L) when unparsing
* {% jira 2892 %} JAR file URI processing does not allow for JARs within JARs
* {% jira 2893 %} Unable to initialise
* {% jira 2895 %} Runtime SDE in ElementCombinator parser with validation causes "Expression Evaluation Error: Element does not have a value"
* {% jira 2897 %} change scalafmt back to rewrite.trailingCommas.style 'never'
* {% jira 2898 %} Compilation error with Java 21, add to CI

### Deprecation/Compatibility

This release removes the unsupported/experimental APIs for creating layer plug-ins that were
present in releases 3.7.0 and prior.
These are replaced with a new supported and documented API which is
much easier to use and maintain and has more functionality.
All layers written to the older 3.7.0 unsupported APIs will be broken and must be rewritten to
use the new API in 3.8.0.

See the [Layers](/layers) documentation which has links to the javadoc for the new API.

{% jira 2825 %} Define supported layering API

### Dependency Changes

The following dependencies have been added or updated:

**Core**

* Apache Commons IO 2.16.1 <small>(update)</small>
* FasterXML Jackson Core 2.16.1 <small>(update)</small>
* FasterXML Woodstox Core 6.6.2 <small>(update)</small>
* ICU4J 75.1 <small>(update)</small>
* Scala Parser Combinators 2.4.0 <small>(update)</small>
* Scala XML 2.3.0 <small>(update)</small>
* Typesafe Config 1.4.3 <small>(update)</small>
* XML Resolver 1.2 <small>(update)</small>

**CLI**

* JLine 3.26.1 <small>(update)</small>

**Code Generator**

* OS Lib 0.10.2 <small>(update)</small>

**Logging**

* SLF4J API 2.0.13 <small>(update)</small>

**Schematron Validator**

* Saxon-HE 12.4 <small>(update)</small>

**Changes to Transitive Dependencies**

* Woodstox Stax2 API 4.2.2 <small>(update, used by Woodstox Core)</small>
* XML Resolver & Data 5.2.2 <small>(update, used by Saxon-HE)</small>
