---
title: "3.9.0"
release: "final"
apache: true
date: 2024-09-27
summary: >
  Bug fixes and performance improvements

source-dist:
 - "apache-daffodil-3.9.0-src.zip"

binary-dist:
 - "apache-daffodil-3.9.0-bin.tgz"
 - "apache-daffodil-3.9.0-bin.zip"
 - "apache-daffodil-3.9.0-bin.msi"
 - "apache-daffodil-3.9.0-1.noarch.rpm"

scala-version: 2.12
---

This release focused on performance improvements and bug fixes. Notably,
performance gains were implemented ranging from 5-15% for most formats. An
additional 5% improvement gain was implemented when using the CLI to parse
large files.

### New Features

* {% jira 864 %} TDML Runner: Ability to specify errors that should NOT occur
* {% jira 2927 %} TDML Runner: Add attribute to specify that unexpected Validation Errors should not be ignored

  The `<tdml:errors>`, `<tdml:warnings>`, and `<tdml:validationErrors>` elements
  now support `match="any"` and `match="none"` attributes to specify that a test
  must either match all or none of the `<tdml:error>` diagnostics. Multiple
  `<tdml:errors>`, `<tdml:warnings>`, and `<tdml:validationErrors>` elements can
  be specified with different `match` attributes.

  New `ignoreUnexpectedWarnings="true"` and
  `ignoreUnexpectedValidationErrors="true"` attributes are supported for
  `<tdml:parserTestCase>` and `<tdml:unparserTestCase>` elements, which causes a
  test to fail if any warnings or validation errors are created but the test does
  not expect the diagnostic.
 
* {% jira 2638 %} Property to suppress warnings only for a specific place in the schema

  A new `daf:suppressSchemaDefinitionWarnings` attribute in the Daffodil
  extension namespace (`urn:ogf:dfdl:2013:imp:daffodil.apache.org:2018:ext`) can
  be placed on any schema component to only suppress warnings created by that
  component. The attribute accepts the same value as the tunable of the same
  name.

* {% jira 2919 %} Need compile API that allows better control over diagnostic path

  A new `Compile.compileResource()` API method is added to find and compile a
  schema specified using a resource path.

### Miscellaneous Bugs/Improvements

* {% jira 1124 %} DPath: xs:date constructor more lax - allows missing digits
* {% jira 2037 %} TravisCI results are too verbose
* {% jira 2331 %} Remove argType parameter from FNZeroArgExpr and derived classes
* {% jira 2447 %} Optimize schemaURIStringsForFullValidation
* {% jira 2678 %} LengthUnits being applied to minLength/maxLength facets
* {% jira 2888 %} Incorrect out of range warning with constant dfdl:length and length/minLength/maxLength facets
* {% jira 2899 %} SDW in SetVariable on VariableRead case incorrectly states VariableSet
* {% jira 2912 %} Warning about Counterintuitive placement issued when not needed
* {% jira 2913 %} Prepare for Daffodil 3.9.0 development
* {% jira 2914 %} Improve release script
* {% jira 2915 %} Need better error message when missing plugin
* {% jira 2916 %} xs:include of no-namespace schema does not chameleon the references properly
* {% jira 2918 %} SchemaFileLocation uriString leads to non-reproducible saved parsers
* {% jira 2920 %} Improve performance of BucketingInputSource
* {% jira 2921 %} Default CLI to MappedByteBuffer when parsing files instead of a FileInputStream
* {% jira 2922 %} Remove unnecesary allocations
* {% jira 2923 %} layer doc page on site has bad hyperlink

### Deprecation/Compatibility

* {% jira 2927 %} TDML Runner: Add attribute to specify that unexpected Validation Errors should not be ignored

  Support for `<tdml:validationErrors />` to specify no validation errors should
  occur is removed. Instead, set the new `ignoreValidationErrors="false"`

* {% jira 2916 %} xs:include of no-namespace schema does not chameleon the references properly

  A bug was fixed so Daffodil now correctly handles resolving unprefixed
  QName references. However, this means that some unprefixed references
  that relied on the previous incorrect behavior may not resolve anymore.
  Although there are a number of ways to fix this, defining a namespace
  prefix and adding that prefix to broken references should work in all
  cases.

### Dependency Changes

The following dependencies have been added or updated:

**Core**

* FasterXML Woodstox Core 6.7.0 <small>(update)</small>
* Scala Reflect and Standard Library 2.12.20 <small>(update)</small>

**CLI**

* JLine 3.26.3 <small>(update)</small>

**Code Generator**

* OS Lib 0.10.7 <small>(update)</small>

**Logging**

* SLF4J API 2.0.16 <small>(update)</small>

**Schematron Validator**

* Saxon-HE 12.5 <small>(update)</small>

**Changes to Transitive Dependencies**

* Geny 1.1.1 <small>(update, used by OS-Lib)</small>
