---
title: "4.2.0"
release: rc1
apache: true
date: 2026-06-24
summary: >
  Bug fixes and performance improvements

source-dist:
 - "apache-daffodil-4.2.0-src.zip"

binary-dist:
 - "apache-daffodil-4.2.0-bin.tgz"
 - "apache-daffodil-4.2.0-bin.zip"
 - "apache-daffodil-4.2.0-bin.exe"
 - "apache-daffodil-4.2.0-1.noarch.rpm"

scala-version: 3
---

This release focused on bugs fixed and performance improvements. A number of
changes resulted in deprecation or backwards incompatible changes. See
[Deprecation/Compatibility](#deprecationcompatibility) section for more
details. 

This release requires Java 17 or newer, and Scala 3.3.x. It was tested with
Java 17, 21, and 25, and Scala 3.3.7. We recommend Java 25 for the best
performance.

# New Features

Of note is the addition of a new `infosetWalkerMode` property that can be used
provide performance improvements in some schemas that aren't very large. Note
that in cases of large infosets or if memory is a concern, the default
`infosetWalkerMode` of "streaming" should be used.

* {% jira 182 %} - option for having xsi:type added to infoset
* {% jira 3070 %} - Support non-streaming InfosetWalker
* {% jira 3082 %} - Make GZIP layer compression level configurable

# Miscellaneous Bugs/Improvements

* {% jira 1598 %} - Unparser: For strings that truncate, the dfdl:valueLength function cannot suspend
* {% jira 3068 %} - SonarCloud Scan Unable to import Scoverage report files
* {% jira 3072 %} - Float/double -0.0 leads to incorrect validation errors with daffodil validation
* {% jira 3073 %} - Use of varargs in serialized classes can lead to reload incompatibilities
* {% jira 3074 %} - stringAsXML always creates empty elements
* {% jira 3075 %} - FuzzData in core catching the wrong Exception
* {% jira 3077 %} - XMLUtils comparison relies on specific ICU versions
* {% jira 3078 %} - TDML Runner XML differences output twice
* {% jira 3079 %} - Saving schema leads to "Invariant broken. No value for delay. Containing object not initialized?"
* {% jira 3081 %} - Configure codecov to not fail on master branch merges
* {% jira 3083 %} - Update deprecated URL constructor in XercesValidator
* {% jira 3086 %} - Remove Fractional Microseconds support from TDML Runner
* {% jira 2909 %} - stringAsXML: TDML XML Comparison fails on mixed content XML or other non-DFDL-conforming XML
* {% jira 3027 %} - Compare Daffodil Performance on Java 17 and 25
* {% jira 3071 %} - Remove retrievedManaged/useCoursier Settings
* {% jira 3089 %} - Set default `infosetWalkerMode` to "streaming"


# Deprecation/Compatibility

* {% jira 2909 %} - stringAsXML: TDML XML Comparison fails on mixed content XML or other non-DFDL-conforming XML

  Previous versions of Daffodil used the ScalaXMLInfosetInputter/Outputter as the 
  default inputter/outputter for TDML Runner, this version changed it to XMLTextInfosetInputter/Outputter 
  since it supports the stringsAsXml feature. Note that for this implementation, we check the 
  actual infoset for the presence of XMLTextInfoset.stringAsXML (currently stringAsXML) 
  and don't normalize CRLF to LF for that element

* {% jira 182 %} - option for having xsi:type added to infoset

  Previous versions of Daffodil could sometimes use scientific notation
  when outputting elements with an xs:decimal type, which XSD does not
  allow. Daffodil now always outputs xs:decimal types using standard
  decimal notation without any exponent part.


# Dependency Changes

The following dependencies have been added, updated, or removed:

## Core

* Apache Commons IO 2.22.0 <small>(update)</small>
* ICU4J 78.3 <small>(update)</small>
* SLF4J 2.0.18 <small>(update)</small>
* FasterXML Woodstox Core 7.2.1 <small>(update)</small>

## Code Generation

* OS Lib 0.11.8 <small>(update)</small>

## Command Line Interface

* JLine 4.2.1 <small>(update)</small>

## Schematron Validator

* Saxon-HE 13.0 <small>(update)</small>
