---

release: final
apache: true
title: 1.3.1
date: 2023-09-12
summary: >
    Adds debugger, data editor and intellisense improvements
    along with package upgrades and bug fixes.

source-dist:
    - "apache-daffodil-vscode-1.3.1-src.zip"

binary-dist:
    - "apache-daffodil-vscode-1.3.1.vsix"
---

This release contains new features and fixes listed below.

# New Features & Fixes

* Upgrade to Daffodil version 3.5.0.
* Use `jsonc-parser` when reading in JSON files, allows for the file to not be strict JSON.
* Fix bug where, when using `"useExistingServer": true`, some functionality would be lost.
* Fix bug where, the `AskForProgramName` and `AskForDataName` commands were not setting `program` and `data` properly.
* Debugger updates:
    * Log to console and file.
    * Allow setting the log level of the debugger.
    * Allow setting the log filepath of the debugger.
    * Change default log level from `DEBUG` to `INFO`.
    * Default log filepath is `/tmp/daffodil-debugger.log`.
    * Extracted debugger zip is packaged instead of the zip.
    * Binds to localhost interface vs 0.0.0.0.
    * Support JDK 17 + JAXB reflection at runtime.
    * Allow some errors to not cause the session and debugger to stop.
* Launch Wizard Updates:
    * Fix duplicate descriptions.
    * Copying configuration items inconsistent.
    * Add items for daffodil debugger log level and log filepath.
    * Fix issue where debug classpath items would linger from different configs.
* Intellisense updates:
    * Add element items: `xs:pattern`, `xs:totalDigits`, `xs:fractionDigits`, `dfdl:property` and `xs:enumeration`.
    * Add missing `xs:restriction` child elements.
    * Add missing `dfdl:escapeScheme` element and the `escapeScheme` attributes.
    * Add additional missing `dfdl:format` attributes.
    * Add a preceeding space if missing when auto completing an attribute.
    * Add additional missing attributes.
    * Add a space after inserting an attribute if missing.
    * Add missing attribute items `dfdl:binaryBooleanTrueRep` and `dfdl:binaryBooleanFalseRep`.
    * Add missing `dfdl:newVariableInstance` element, also add it as a child of the `xs:appinfo` element.
    * Add additional hierarchy levels to determine dfdl elements to suggest.
    * Add `dfdl:element` to list of suggestions for `xs:element/annotation/app`.
* Data Editor updates:
    * Add support for large file editing and "infinite" scrolling.
    * Added support for editing in several Data Editors simultaneously.
    * Implement Incremental Search and Replace, and Save As functionality.
    * Consolidate single-byte and multi-byte view and edit modes.
    * Values are editable in the Data Inspector.
    * Content-type discovery using Apache Tika.
    * Initial implementation of a data profiler.
    * Implement "overwrite only" mode that will keep the file size the same, even when performing operations like Search and Replace where the token sizes aren't the same.
* Add semantic highlighting for XPath expressions.
* Fix bug of TDML generation on Windows creating bad paths.
* Rename DataEditor hierarchy varibles in Launch Config:
    * From:
    
        ```json
        "dataEditor": {
            "logFile": "${workspaceFolder}/dataEditor-${omegaEditPort}.log",
            "logLevel": "info"
        }
        ```

        To:

        ```json
        "dataEditor": {
            "logging": {
                "logLevel": "info"
                "file": "${workspaceFolder}/dataEditor-${omegaEditPort}.log",
            }
        }
        ```
* Code refactoring and cleanup.
* Packaging process improvements.

# Closed Issues

[GitHub v1.3.1 Closed Issues](https://github.com/apache/daffodil-vscode/milestone/10?closed=1)
