---

title: 1.4.1
release: final
apache: true
date: 2025-06-30
summary: >
    Adds debugger, data editor, TDML and intellisense improvements
    along with package upgrades and bug fixes.

source-dist:
    - "apache-daffodil-vscode-1.4.1-src.zip"

binary-dist:
    - "apache-daffodil-vscode-1.4.1.vsix"
---

This release contains new features and fixes listed below.

#### New Features & Fixes

* Debugger:
    * Added appropriate warning or error messages when data is left over after the parse operation is completed.
      * After a parse operation is completed, the debugger will check if data is left over. When data is left over the debugger will log an error message to the console.
      * All errors relayed to extension, e.g. left over data, parse errors, bad schema definition, etc. will have a more aggressive popup in the center of the screen.
    * Enhanced Debugging in Visual Studio Code (VS Code) by developing a dedicated command panel for DFDL. Now, all debugging-related commands are conveniently grouped in one place, making them easier to find and use. This command panel dynamically updates to only show relevant commands based on the current debug mode and can be quickly executed using a play button.
    * Upgraded to Apache Daffodil 3.10.0. 
    * Created a dropdown list for Log Level setting in launch configuration wizard.
    * Implemented functionality to auto-suggest DFDL schema root element and root namespace based on the selected schema within the launch configuration.
    * Fixed a bug where the Infoset Diff View does not consistently show XML syntax highlighting on the previous screen.
    * Fixed an issue with respecting global settings from settings.json before respecting local settings from launch.json.
    * Fixed an issue with the launch configuration wizard resetting the form when switching back and forth with another tab.
    * Fixed a bug that could cause the debugger to hang for larger schema and data files. 
    * Fixed the launch configuration issue with not loading correct default values for the following fields when creating a new configuration from the wizard menu. Launch configuration now loads the proper default values for the following fields:
      * Absolute path to the DFDL schema file
      * Name of the root element
      * Namespace of the root element 
      * Daffodil Debugger Settings - Log File 
      * Daffodil Debugger Settings - Log Level 
* Data Editor:
    * Fixed a bug where the OmegaEdit server fails to shut down when running yarn test on Windows 10.
    * Reworked the Data Editor heartbeat structure to fix the issue with the data editor continuing to log after the debug operation is completed.
    * Fixed a bug with a message popup after the last data editor tab closed for the OmegaEdit server failed to shut down, even after the OmegaEdit server successfully shut down.
    * Fixed a bug where Data Editor Server no longer closes after debug completes in certain scenarios.
    * Fixed a bug where Data Editor can Seek beyond data in data file.
    * Fixed a bug when exporting profiler data as CSV, it inserts invalid 256 as a byte value.
    * Fixed data profiler not displaying all byte values for certain window sizes or monitor resolution.
    * Added hoverable tooltip for Disk Size and Computed Size in Data Editor.
* IntelliSense:
    * Implemented functionality to return different element-level results based on the namespace prefix within the dfdl schema.
    * Fixed an issue with Intellisense, which doesn't handle CTRL+Space within an attribute name consistently in every instance.
    * Fixed a bug with a misleading hover popup on dfdl:format attributes.
    * Fixed incorrect suggestion choices for properties in dfdl:format.
    * Fixed a bug with the closing tag trigger would not work for multiple tags on a single line.
    * Fixed discrepancy Between dropdown Items' namespace and inserted items' namespace where incorrect nsprefix was applied to dfdl element.
* TDML:
    * Added error message and user notification for a duplicate test case found during Append TDML operation.
    * Addressed incorrect relative paths when copying or appending TDML.
    * Addressed inability to execute TDML Test Case on Ubuntu OS.
    * Enabled reproducible JAXB generated TDML code.
    * Fixed tdmlConfig portion of launch.json to be consistent with the TDML Action section of the Launch Config Wizard.
* Documentation:
    * Created an “Introduction to Daffodil VS Code Extension” wiki page for beginners.
    * Consolidated Development Information from wiki page and Development.md file Into Development.MD to prevent duplicate information about the development environment.
    * Corrected a Wiki page for VS Code extension installation instructions.
* Known Issues:
    * Some nightly tests are still failing intermittently due to GitHub runners.
    * Ubuntu 24.04 (release date 04/25/2024) When using the debugger to step through a dfdl schema utilizing the step over action, the step over action will trigger dfdl intellisense to display a list of suggestions when a line in the schema is reached that results in output to the infoset. This problem can be mitigated by disabling "WaylandEnable" by uncommenting "#WaylandEnable=false" in the /etc/gdm3/custom.conf configuration file and rebooting the system.
    * At this time the debugger step into and step out actions have no code behind them, using either button results in an unrecoverable error. We have not found a way to disable the step into and step out buttons. This problem occurs in all Operating Systems. This is noted as a GitHub Issue.

#### Closed Issues

[GitHub v1.4.1 Closed Issues](https://github.com/apache/daffodil-vscode/milestone/11?closed=1)
