---

release: rc1
apache: true
title: 1.4.0
date: 2024-06-20
summary: >
    Adds debugger, data editor, TDNL and intellisense improvements
    along with package upgrades and bug fixes.

source-dist:
    - "apache-daffodil-vscode-1.4.0-src.zip"

binary-dist:
    - "apache-daffodil-vscode-1.4.0.vsix"
---

This release contains new features and fixes listed below.

#### New Features & Fixes

* Debugger:
    * Simplification of the configuration and setup of the extension through changes to the launch wizard.
    * Added settings to launch configurations for root element name and namespace to debug schema files from a jar.
    * Fixed issue with empty infoset files being created.
    * Fixed issue with infoset file extension not matching output format.
        * Users now receive a warning that file path does not end with the correct extension and will be updated appropriately.
    * Changed how late-arriving events were handled when requesting old state.
    * Resolved issues with zip file corruption in VS Code debug sessions.
    * Resolved issues when running in Java 17+.
    * Provide better feedback to user to understand error and debug messages.
    * Upgraded to Apache Daffodil 3.8.0.
* Data Editor:
    * Removed HexView and replaced with Ωedit™.
    * Highlighting of bytes/bits to track the infoset when debugging.
    * Providing a more intuitive data representation of First and Last Byte.
    * Fixed issue where binary display radix would still display 16 bytes per row, instead of 8.
    * Fixed inability to edit a "non-regular" sized file ( file size < 2 ).
    * Rerouted all file / viewport UI offset traversal to use toplevel seek() function.
    * Implemented new Help layout for larger/enhanced Tooltip implementations.
    * Fixed issue where the editor edit instructions were difficult to read on smaller width/height windows.
    * Better traversal and navigation of data and byte index.
    * Added Relative and Absolute seek offset determination and traversal.
    * Addition of Multicharacter encodings, Byte Order Maker, and language detection.
    * Improved viewport geometries configurations, management, and manipulation: including bytes per rows, number of rows, togglable views, reframing, * persisting selections, etc.
    * Ability to write selection to a file operation.
    * Ability to navigate to a certain relative byte index.
    * Data profiling improvements.
    * Saving selected segments to a file.
* IntelliSense:
    * Added hover functionality to display the attributes available to specific tags.
    * Making XPath validation more complete.
    * Better under the hood testing to ensure a smoother development process for adding new IntelliSense suggestions.
    * Continue developing on a Matrix Spreadsheet for the DFDL community to reference in regard to the specifications.
* TDML:
    * Created a custom TDML GUI editor.
    * Copy, Append and Execute TDML test case functionality.
* Documentation: 
    * Improved the barrier to entry for contributors by providing additional documentation on how to get started and work with our team.
* Known Issues:
    * Nightly tests failing intermittently 
    * TDML Copy, Execute and Append Functionality is currently not working on MacOS Platform 
    * TDML functionality currently do not have proper error messages to help user identify the root cause. 
    * Data Editor Continues Logging Upon Debug Completion 
    * Byte highlighting doesn't always work when scrolling through the results in the Data Editor 

#### Closed Issues

[GitHub v1.4.0 Closed Issues](https://github.com/apache/daffodil-vscode/milestone/5?closed=1)
